---
title: 'Bokeh 0.12.3 Released'
date: 2016-10-09
author: Luke Canavan
featured_image:
excerpt: We are pleased to announce the release of Bokeh 0.12.3!
redirect_from:
  - /blog/2016/10/9/release-0-12-3/
---

We're pleased to announce the release of Bokeh 0.12.3!

This minor update adds a few small features and several bug fixes including:

* New categorical color mapper
* Tap tool and tooltips working for VBar and HBar
* BokehJS reduced in size by twenty percent
* Support for generating legends from a DataSource column
* Better hover tool support for some Charts

We'd also like to highlight that we now package and upload examples for each
Bokeh release to our CDN.
[Click here to download](https://cdn.pydata.org/bokeh/examples/examples-0.12.3.zip).
This should resolve the issue of examples in our source repository not being
compatible with older Bokeh releases.

Finally, project lead Bryan Van de Ven gave a great talk at PyBay 2016 about
building interactive applications with Bokeh. It can be viewed on
[YouTube](https://youtu.be/xqwCxuEBpxk?list=PL85KuAjbN_gtGn4v1ELSWJlTFZF_5Ciog).

-----

For full details, see the [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/bokeh/bokeh/blob/0.12.3/CHANGELOG)
and [Release Notes](https://bokeh.pydata.org/en/latest/docs/releases/0.12.3.html).

This release can most easily be installed from the Bokeh channel on Anaconda.org via
``conda install -c bokeh bokeh`` if you are using [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/downloads)
or ``pip install bokeh`` otherwise.

-----

#### Categorical Color Mapping

Support for color mapping scalar data was added in the 0.12.2 release. Thanks
to Sarah Bird, this feature has been extended to make it possible to use a
``CategoricalColorMapper`` object to map a categorical data column to a color
palette.

Here's an example excerpted from the Gapminder demo, where the country bubbles
are colored mapped by region:

```python
...

# Add the circle
color_mapper = CategoricalColorMapper(palette=Spectral6, factors=regions_list)
renderer_source = sources['_%s' % years[0]]
circle_glyph = Circle(
    x='fertility', y='life', size='population',
    fill_color={'field': 'region', 'transform': color_mapper},
    fill_alpha=0.8,
    line_color='#7c7e71', line_width=0.5, line_alpha=0.5)
circle_renderer = plot.add_glyph(renderer_source, circle_glyph)

...
```

See the working Gapminder application and source code in the
[example gallery](https://bokeh.pydata.org/en/latest/docs/gallery.html)
to see the full implementation.

#### Support for generating legends from a DataSource column

We've also added support for creating custom legends in a concise, explicit
manner. Legends now have an ``item`` argument that accepts a list of ``LegendItem``
objects.

LegendItem labels can be a single value or a field that corresponds to a
column name in a DataSource and a list of renderers (in order to know how
the legend key should match the glyph).

Here's an example of the former in the Bokeh
[daylight](https://github.com/bokeh/bokeh/blob/master/examples/models/daylight.py)
demo:

```python
...

legend = Legend(items=[
    LegendItem(label=value('sunrise'), renderers=[sunrise_line_renderer]),
    LegendItem(label=value('sunset'), renderers=[sunset_line_renderer])
])
plot.add_layout(legend)

...
```

Here's the legend that is created:

<div class="bk-root">
    <script
        src="/js/release-0-12-3/daylight.js"
        id="b9644c90-fa68-4f87-b313-e3f2be6c58b6"
        data-bokeh-model-id="d15de92c-053d-416b-831a-4b9f44c0e32a"
        data-bokeh-doc-id="20524ce4-0390-4b31-84c3-741ec1eef5ed"
    ></script>
</div>

In the Gapminder demo, the legend was created using the field string method:

```python
...

plot.add_layout(Legend(items=[LegendItem(label=field('region'), renderers=[circle_renderer])]))

...
```

The resulting legend contains entries for each unique value in the column
labeled 'region' in the data source attached to ``circle_renderer``. Again,
you can view the live application in the
[example gallery](https://bokeh.pydata.org/en/latest/docs/gallery.html).

-----

As we're nearing in on the Bokeh 1.0 release, I'd like to thank the nearly 200
total contributors who have helped make Bokeh such an amazing project. As
always, for questions, technical assistance or if you're interested in
contributing, please ask the
[Bokeh mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/anaconda.com/forum/#!forum/bokeh)
or join the chat on [Gitter](https://gitter.im/bokeh/bokeh).

Thanks,

Luke Canava
