---
title: 'Preview of 2.0 Changes'
date: 2019-08-03
author: Bryan Van de Ven
featured_image:
excerpt: >
  Bokeh 2.0 is around the corner, this post describes what changes are coming.
draft: false
bokeh: >
---

Bokeh 2.0 is coming out soon! This post describes some of the changes (large and
small) that will happen at that time. All of these changes will be re-iterated
and explained in a Migration Guide that will accompany the Bokeh 2.0 release notes.

----

The first and most important change is that Python 3.6 will become the
minimum supported Python version. Many core PyData projects have already
moved forward to drop Python 2 support in 2019, and now Bokeh will do the same.

Additionally, Tornado 5 will become the minimum Tornado version
for the Bokeh Server.

Given that the changes above necessitate a major number bump, we are also taking
the opportunity to make other small breaking changes for the sake of future
improvements and maintainability. Generally, the changes fall into these categories:

* Obsolete and deprecated functions and attributes that will be removed

* Usage that has resulted in silent errors may raise exceptions immediately

* Small changes to enable new functionality that is not currently possible.

### Hovertool Formatters

Until now, the ``formatters`` property accepted a CDS column name. For example
a formatter for a tooltip for ``"@foo`` could be specied with just ``"foo"``:

```
hover_tool.formatters = { "foo": "datetime"}   # BAD
```

After 2.0, the full matching tooltip specification, including the ``"@"``, must
be used:

```
hover_tool.formatters = { "@foo": "datetime"}   # GOOD
```

This syntax makes it more clear what the formatter key should match up to (many users tried to match the key with a tooltip *label*).
More importantly, this change will allow tooltip formatters to be used
with CDS columns *and* with "special variables", e.g. ``"$x"`` (which is not
possible now).

### ColumnDataSource and Selection

* Obsolete old-style selection dictionaries, i.e. ``selected['1d']`` will
  be removed. Use the attributes on ``Selection`` models, e.g ``selected.indices``.

* The ``ColumnDataSource.selected`` property will become read-only. Only change
  *attributes* on the default ``Selection`` models, e.g. ``selected.indices``, rather
  than attempting to replace an entire ``Selection`` itself. (Previously this generally
  resulted in *silent* errors.)

* The ``ColumnDataSource.data`` property will only be settable from plain Python
  dicts, or Pandas DataFrames. Attempting to set from another CDS, i.e ``s1.data = s2.data``, will
  raise an error. (Previously this generally resulted in *silent* errors.)

### CustomJS and Callbacks

* All deprecated functionality for CoffeeScript and PyScript (i.e. ``from_coffeescript`` and
  ``from_py_func`` methods) will be removed everywhere.

*  The ``callback_throttle`` and ``callback_policy`` properties will be removed from all sliders.
   Use ``value`` for continous updates and ``value_throttled`` for updates only
   on mouseup.

* Old-style ``callback`` properties will be removed generally. Use modern ``on_change`` / ``on_event`` for
  Python callbacks in Bokeh server apps, or ``js_on_change`` / ``js_on_event`` for JavaScript
  callbacks.

* The ``use_strict`` property will be removed from all models that it had been
  on previously. All JavaScript code, e.g. for ``CustomJS`` will always be rendered
  with ``"use_strict"`` added in all cases.

### Tile Providers

The named tile properties in ``tile_providers.py``, e.g ``CARTODBPOSITRON`` will
return a vendor id for that tile provider. This value can be passed to the
``get_provider`` method directly to return a new ``TileProvider`` instance.

### Last Things

There are some other changes that are not expected to be noticeable by the vast majority
of users, but we note them here for completeness:

* The obsolete Sphinx confiuguration parameters ``bokeh_plot_use_relative_paths``
  and ``bokeh_plot_pyfile_include_dirs`` and the unused ``PLOT_PAGE`` template will be removed.

* Bokeh wire protocol messages will no longer express any revision, and URLs for
  server sessions will no longer specify ``"bokeh-protocol-version"``. It is assumed
  any client and server communicating are the same release version (which has
  always been true in any usage scenario to date).

* Deprecated ``bokeh.client`` method ``ClientSession.loop_until_closed`` will be removed

* Non-functional Plot properties ``Plot.h_symmetry`` and ``Plot.v_symmetry`` will removed

* The ``bokeh.util.future`` module will be removed

* The ``bokeh.util.string``  functions ``encode_utf8``, ``decode_utf8``, and ``escape``
  will removed

----

The Bokeh team appreciates that changes can be disruptive. We strive to avoid
all breaking changes within major-number version series (and to bump major numbers
only rarely). The changes that are part of this major number bump will enable
features that are currently blocked, and allow scarce contributor time to be utilized
more effetively and efficiently in the future. We are grateful for your patience and
understanding, and if you run into issues or questions, please come by the
[Project Discourse](https://discourse.bokeh.org/) for help.

As always, anyone interested in helping out should drop by the
[Dev Chat Channel](https://gitter.im/bokeh/bokeh-dev) and say hello!

Thanks,

Bryan Van de Ven
