---
title: 'Bokeh 1.2.0 Released'
date: 2019-05-28
author: Bryan Van de Ven
featured_image:
excerpt: We are pleased to announce the release of Bokeh 1.2!
draft: false
---

<link
    href="https://cdn.pydata.org/bokeh/release/bokeh-1.2.0.min.css"
    rel="stylesheet" type="text/css">

<script src="https://cdn.pydata.org/bokeh/release/bokeh-1.2.0.min.js"></script>

<style>
.shadow {
  -webkit-box-shadow: 9px 10px 35px -8px rgba(0,0,0,0.75);
-moz-box-shadow: 9px 10px 35px -8px rgba(0,0,0,0.75);
box-shadow: 9px 10px 35px -8px rgba(0,0,0,0.75);
}
</style>

**We are pleased to announce the release of Bokeh 1.2!**

This point release contains a few new features. Some highlights:

* Styling options for fill patterns / hatching [`#6135`](https://github.com/bokeh/bokeh/issues/6135)
* Built-in support for stacked areas and lines [`#8848`](https://github.com/bokeh/bokeh/issues/8848)
* New `title` property for `Legend` [`#6769`](https://github.com/bokeh/bokeh/issues/6769)
* Slider `callback_policy` now works for Bokeh Apps [`#4540`](https://github.com/bokeh/bokeh/issues/4540)

For full details, see the [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/bokeh/bokeh/blob/master/CHANGELOG)
and [Release Notes](https://bokeh.pydata.org/en/latest/docs/releases.html).
Additionally, examples for each release are uploaded to CDN.
[Click here to download](https://cdn.pydata.org/bokeh/examples/examples-1.2.0.zip).

If you are using
[Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/downloads), Bokeh can most easily be installed
by executing the command ``conda install -c bokeh bokeh`` . Otherwise, use
``pip install bokeh``.

-----

Before getting to the real content, it's worth mentioning one important change:
*The Google Groups mailing list has been retired*. In its place, there is now
a Discourse instance for community discussions. All of the old content from the
mailing list has been imported into the Disourse, and is now easily searchable!
Switching to discourse has many benefits besides search: code formatting, math
text, rich media, as well as search and traffic statistics for admins, that will
help us better improve the site and our docs.

We have made it easy to log in with Google, GitHub, and Twitter (or you can
create a email login).
[Check out the new Bokeh Discourse site today!](https://discourse.bokeh.org)

-----

### Fill Patterns

Even well before [`#6135`](https://github.com/bokeh/bokeh/issues/6135), which
is already a few years old at this point, I had wanted to be able to support
fill patterns (or "hatching") for things like bars are patches. I am pleased
to report that Bokeh now supports a wide variety of
[Hatch Properties](https://bokeh.pydata.org/en/1.2.0/docs/user_guide/styling.html#hatch-properties)
for specifying fill patterns:

&nbsp;

<center>
<div id="hatch-patterns-plot" width="60%"></div>
</center>

<script>
  fetch('/static/release-1-2-0/hatch-patterns.json')
    .then(function(response) { return response.json(); })
    .then(function(item) { Bokeh.embed.embed_item(item, "hatch-patterns-plot"); })
</script>

These can be used with bar and patch type glyphs, and basic usage consists of
setting the `hatch_pattern` value:

```python
p.vbar(..., hatch_pattern="dot")
```

But typically you will want to tweak other hatch properties such as alpha, color,
weight, or scale.

Besides these built-in hatch patterns, it's also possible set fill patterns
from any image, as long as the image is available at a URL (inline base64 data
URLs will work too):

&nbsp;

<center>
<div style="width:70%;">
<div id="hatch-custom-plot"></div>
</div>
</center>

<script>
  fetch('/static/release-1-2-0/hatch-custom.json')
    .then(function(response) { return response.json(); })
    .then(function(item) { Bokeh.embed.embed_item(item, "hatch-custom-plot"); })
</script>

These are made by adding a named `ImageURLTexture` to `hatch_extra`, and then
using that name as the `hatch_pattern`:

```python
p.vbar(...,
       hatch_pattern=dict(value='image'),
       hatch_extra={"image": ImageURLTexture(url=url)})
```

Lastly, it should be mentioned that fill patterns also work for grid bands,
which I personally think looks especially nice:

&nbsp;

<center>
<div style="width:70%;">
<div id="hatch-grid-band-plot"></div>
</div>
</center>


<script>
  fetch('/static/release-1-2-0/hatch-grid-band.json')
    .then(function(response) { return response.json(); })
    .then(function(item) { Bokeh.embed.embed_item(item, "hatch-grid-band-plot"); })
</script>

The bands above were configured with this code:

```python
p.xgrid.band_hatch_pattern = "/"
p.xgrid.band_hatch_alpha = 0.6
p.xgrid.band_hatch_color = "lightgrey"
p.xgrid.band_hatch_weight = 0.5
p.xgrid.band_hatch_scale = 10
```

There are some other places that fill pattern support could still be added,
such as various annotation classes. It's not a lot of work and there are some
example PRs that can be referenced, so this would make a great task for a
new contributor!

### Stacked Lines and Areas

New glyph functions for directed areas were added in Bokeh 1.2, as well as
covenience methods to stack areas and lines.

First off, the `varea` and `harea` glyphs were added for drawing
[directed areas](https://bokeh.pydata.org/en/1.2.0/docs/user_guide/plotting.html#directed-areas),
which are filled regions between two series that share a common index.

These are nice enough on their own, but they are even more useful for making
stacked area charts *much easier* to create:

&nbsp;

<center>
<div id="stacked-glyphs-plot"></div>
</center>

<script>
  fetch('/static/release-1-2-0/stacked-glyphs.json')
    .then(function(response) { return response.json(); })
    .then(function(item) { Bokeh.embed.embed_item(item, "stacked-glyphs-plot"); })
</script>

There are new methods analogous to `vbar_stack` and `hbar_stack` for directed
areas as well as lines:

* `varea_stack`
* `harea_stack`

for [stacking directed areas](https://bokeh.pydata.org/en/1.2.0/docs/user_guide/plotting.html#stacked-areas), and

* `vline_stack`
* `hline_stack`

for [stacking lines](https://bokeh.pydata.org/en/1.2.0/docs/user_guide/plotting.html#stacked-lines).

Just like the stack methods for bars, these accept a sequence of column names
to stack, and return a list of glyph renderers. Any other arguments are
broadcast across all the renderers. The plot above was generated with code
like this:

```python
colnames = ['y0', 'y1', 'y2', 'y3', 'y4', 'y5', 'y6']

p.varea_stack(colnames, x='index', color=colors, source=df,
              legend=[value(x) for x in colnames])

p.vline_stack(colnames, x='index', color="black", source=df)
```

For a full example, check out the updated
[*stacked_area.py*](https://github.com/bokeh/bokeh/blob/1.2.0/examples/plotting/file/stacked_area.py)

Note that the example plot above also shows off the new legend title, by setting
`p.legend.title = "Things"`.

### Slider Callback Policy

Bokeh sliders have a `callback_policy` property that allows for throttling
responses to slider movements. Until now, this policy only functioned with
`CustomJS` Javascript callbacks, and  only with with old-style `callback`
property (not with the newer, general purpose `js_on_change`).

In this release, a new `value_throttled` property has been added, that can
trigger both JavaScript and Python callbacks (in a Bokeh server app):

```python
slider.callback_policy = "mouseup"

# both of these will respect the callback policy now
slider.js_on_change('value_throttled', ...)
slider.on_change('value_throttled', ...)
```
The slider above specifies the "mouseup" callback policy, so the callbacks
will only execute when the user releases the mouse after adjusting a slider,
and not on any intermediate steps.

Note that the `value` property can also still be used to trigger callbacks
&mdash;they will execute unconditionally on every movement.

Also note that the old-style `callback` property will be removed in
Bokeh 2.0 in the near future. The general `js_on_change` and `on_change`
mothods should be used going forward.

### Seeking Testimonials and Use Cases

A potential avenue for funding Bokeh development in a signifiant way has opened
up. The grant program is specifically targeting Open Source projects that are
used in bio-sciences. If you use Bokeh in any way for anything bio-science
related, please fill out the  Google form below.

&nbsp;

<center>
<iframe src="https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdBcrJnw-Q08XPssO2yk5RIn7PmzqPOobg-Lk9eVGy3Qj9JwA/viewform?embedded=true" width="640" height="987" frameborder="0" marginheight="0" marginwidth="0">Loading...</iframe>
</center>

### Help financially

Bokeh relies on paid cloud infrastucture to host the CDN files for BokehJS,
serve the documentation and demos, and store CI build artifacts. [Your contribution
to NumFocus helps defray those costs](https://numfocus.salsalabs.org/donate-to-bokeh/index.html).

----

As always, anyone interested in helping out should drop by the
[Dev Chat Channel](https://gitter.im/bokeh/bokeh-dev) and say hello!

Thanks,

Bryan Van de Ven
